# Rethinking Religion and Identity: Durkheim, Davidman, and the Unsynagogued Jews

In The Elementary Forms of Religious Life, Durkheim (1995) focused on defining religion, centuring his analysis on his binary distinction between the sacred and the profane. In essence, the sacred is what evokes the feeling of transcending the material world, while the profane is what comprises that material world (pp. 34-35). The unsynagogued Jews, whom Davidman (2007) interviewed in “The New Voluntarism and the Case of Unsynagogued Jews,” did not practice their beliefs in a traditional way. They tailored the rituals to better accommodate their lives, for example, sometimes serving pizza instead of traditional food for Shabbat (p. 58). While their rituals appear more secular, involving everyday items like pizza, their practice still remains sacred. This is because such practices symbolize the beliefs and values of the Jews, give purpose and meaning to them, and therefore, unite them with something greater than themselves. 

Durkheim (1995) believed that religion is a social thing (p. 9). Although the unsynagogued Jews do not congregate in synagogues, they practice their beliefs at home in unique ways. This aligns with what Davidman (2007) noted: some of the central practices of Jews occur in homes (p. 58). Even though a family is not as big as a religious congregation, it is definitely a group that shares the same rituals (Davidman 2007: 41). It is still a social practice. In addition, the unsynagogued Jews Davidman interviewed maintained some connection with the synagogue. For example, one of the interviewees partly sought legitimacy of her practice, hiking in the mountains for Rosh Hashanah, from the rabbi’s blessing. Durkheim argued that rituals require consecrated people who can say certain words and perform certain actions (p. 35). To that unsynagoged Jew, it was the rabbi and his blessing. Despite their untraditional ways, the practices of unsynagogued Jews are social, as they engage with their families and also the consecrated people of the synagogue. 

Durkheim (1995) argued that society is essentially god. He explained that humans constructed religion to explain the force that subjects them to go against their natural instincts when in actuality, the source of such moral influence is society (pp. 209-211). This idea can be applied to understand the ascribed identity of Jews. As Davidman (2007) noted, the unsynagogued Jews believe that once someone is a Jew, they are forever a Jew (p. 61). The sense of obligation to identify as a Jew can be understood as social pressure. For instance, one of the interviewees described Judaism as the ideas that people sacrificed for during the Holocaust and hence believed that it is her duty to identify with them (Davidman 2007: 64). The collective history of the Jews forms the basis of why many Jews believe that their Jewish identity is immutable and demonstrates the moral influence that Durkheim attributed to society. 

Collective effervescence is characterized by Durkheim (1995) as heightened emotions that spread among individuals when they come together as a group (p. 217). The individuals embody the group’s beliefs and reach a moral harmony with their neighbors (Durkheim 1995: 213). To the Jews, the collective effervescence is provoked when the subject of Holocaust is brought to the surface. The collective memory of Holocaust is so strong that even the thought of it brings intense emotions to the Jews. It is so crucial that the unsynagogued Jews gain their sense of Jewishness around others who do not share the history of Holocaust (Davidman 2007: 63). As collective effervescence promotes the unity of religious believers, the collective emotions aroused by Holocaust is important for Jewish solidarity.
